

Meran, April 1920
Dear Frau Milena, You are toiling over the translation in the
middle of the dreary Vienna world. Somehow I am both
moved and ashamed. You will have probably already received
a letter from Wolff, at least he wrote to me some time ago
concerning such a letter. I did not write any novella entitled
"Murderers" (although this was apparently advertised in a cata-
log)-there is some misunderstanding, but since it's supposed
to be the best one of the lot maybe it's mine after all.
Judging from your last two letters anxiety and worry seem
to have left you once and for all, this probably applies to your
husband as well, how much I wish it for both of you. I recall
a Sunday afternoon years ago, I was creeping along the wall
of houses on the Franzensquai and ran into your husband
heading toward me in much the same way-two headache
experts, naturally each after his very own fashion. I don't re-
member whether we then went on together or passed each
other by, the difference between these two possibilities could
not have been very great. But that is past and should remain
deep in the past. Is it nice at home?
Cordial greetings
Kafka

Prague, October 22, 1920
Milena, I received this letter meant for Vlasta. Maybe it's a
mix-up, a small misfortune, evidently designed to have me
torment you this way once I've exhausted all other possibilities.
At first I wanted to rush the letter to Vlasta, but that would
have been extraordinarily dumb, since she would have realized
she had my letter, if that were indeed the case. In any event it
was extraordinarily intelligent of me not to do so or really not
quite so intelligent, as it was mostly just the trouble involved
holding me back. Anyway, the whole thing isn't all that bad,
just a small entry in my catalog of faults.
Today, Friday, I received the enclosed letter from Illový; it's
a completely insignificant in and of itself, but it can be seen as
slight intervention in our affairs and consequently I would
have tried to stop it had I known about it earlier. (Illový, an
exaggeratedly modest, quiet person-"and even little Illový" as
it recently said in Cerven, when they were listing the Jews of
the rightist party-was in some of my classes in high school;
I haven't spoken with him in many years and this is the first
letter I've ever received from him.)
Now it's almost certain I will leave. My cough and shortness
of breath are forcing me to do so. I'm also sure I'll stay in
Vienna and that we will see one another.

Prague, July 15, 1920
Thursday
Just briefly before I leave for the office: I didn't want to say
anything, at least not now, while you are fighting this terrible
battle-I've been choking on it for 3 days-but it's impossible
not to, I have to, after all it's my battle as well. You may have
noticed that I haven't slept for several nights. It's simply the
"fear." It really is stronger than I am, it tosses me around at
will, I don't know up from down anymore or right from left.
his time it began with Stair. The truly ire signe stowe her.
there were remarks which got mixed up in your last letter.
These remarks made me happy, but only despairingly so, since
although what you say about the fear is very persuasive-to
mind, heart, and body all at once—l have an even deeper
conviction-I don't know exactly where-which evidently
nothing can persuade. Finally-this really contributed to
weaken me—the wonderful calming-uncalming effect left by
your physical presence is wearing off as the days go by. If only
you were already here! As it is I have no one, no one here
except the fear, together we roll through the nights locked in
each other's arms. This fear is really something very serious
which strangely enough was always only directed at the future,
no, that's not right. Moreover, it is partly explained by the fact
that it constantly forces me to realize I must admit-and this
is a great confession-that Milena, too, is only human. What
you say about this is really very beautiful and kind-having
heard that I wouldn't want to hear anything else; nevertheless,
to maintain that the stakes here are not very high is a very
questionable assertion. After all, this fear is not merely my
private fear-although it also is, terribly enough-but it is also
the tear inherent in all faith since time began.
Just having written you that cools my head
Yours